feat: add voice tracing and evaluation docs scaffold (#4368)
langchain-ai/docs: src/langsmith/trace-voice-fundamentals.mdx

---

Voice agents differ from text agents in ways that change how you should trace them. A conversation is continuous, bidirectional, and interruptible: users talk over the agent, change topics mid-sentence, and expect sub-second responses. To debug and evaluate these systems, your traces need to capture the conversation as a single, audio-aware unit rather than a series of disconnected text exchanges.

This page covers the core conventions for tracing voice applications in LangSmith. Follow these patterns regardless of which framework or model provider you use ([OpenAI Realtime](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime), [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live), [LiveKit](/langsmith/trace-with-livekit), or [Pipecat](/langsmith/trace-with-pipecat)).

<Note>
These conventions assume you are exporting traces to LangSmith through one of the supported [tracing setups](/langsmith/observability). For audio rendering and playback in the UI, see [Log multimodal traces](/langsmith/log-multimodal-traces) and [Upload files with traces](/langsmith/upload-files-with-traces).
</Note>

> ## Core conventions

Author: Great. Can we add  a section about how there are two types of ways of building voice agenst: cascades and STS and how the traces differ. Basically, STS is going to be a series of events over a socket. ther ear eno input/output pairs, ebcause each trace event is just a payload sent over the wire. for teh cascade, there are now different model types STT, LLM and TTS, with repetition between them.

3. [**Mark the trace as audio**](#mark-the-trace-as-audio) with `ls_modality` so it renders and filters as a voice trace.

### Attach conversation audio to the root run

Attach the recorded audio for the full conversation to the root run of the trace. Listening to the actual audio is the fastest way to understand what happened. Transcripts lose information that only audio captures: tone, emotion, talking over each other, long pauses, background noise, and speech recognition errors.

Attach audio as a file using the [attachments API](/langsmith/upload-files-with-traces). Where possible, attach both:

- **Input audio** — what the user said.
- **Output audio** — what the agent said back.

```python Python
from langsmith import traceable
from langsmith.schemas import Attachment

@traceable(name="voice_conversation")
def run_conversation(session_id: str, input_audio: bytes, output_audio: bytes):
    # ... run the voice agent ...
    return {
        "input_audio": Attachment(mime_type="audio/wav", data=input_audio),
        "output_audio": Attachment(mime_type="audio/wav", data=output_audio),
    }

> ```

Author: audio should be a single file with both the user and the agent audio. it should be recorded to what is being played to the client. The reason for this is that we want to recored what happened including of network delays, disordering of packets, etc, not what was generated but never played.

</Tip>

### Trace each conversation as a single trace

A conversation represents a single interaction, so it should be a single trace. Do not break a conversation into one trace per turn.

When you split a conversation into per-turn traces, you lose the information that lives *between* turns:

- **Interruptions** — when the user talks over the agent and the agent stops.
- **Turn-taking and latency** — gaps between turns, and how long the agent took to respond.
- **Cross-turn context** — references to earlier parts of the conversation.
- **Conversation-level outcomes** — whether the user's goal was ultimately resolved.

Instead, model each turn as a child run nested under one root run that represents the whole conversation:

```text
voice_conversation                ← root run (whole conversation, audio attached, ls_modality="audio")
├─ turn 1
│  ├─ speech-to-text
│  ├─ agent / LLM
│  └─ text-to-speech
├─ turn 2
│  └─ ...
└─ ...

> ```

Author: remove the turn. it should be just stt and tts and llm spans and middleware. the whole point is that we don't know what a turn is

---
title: Voice tracing fundamentals
sidebarTitle: Voice fundamentals
description: Best practices for tracing voice and audio agents in LangSmith, including conversation audio, single-trace conversations, and the audio modality flag.
---

> Voice agents differ from text agents in ways that change how you should trace them. A conversation is continuous, bidirectional, and interruptible: users talk over the agent, change topics mid-sentence, and expect sub-second responses. To debug and evaluate these systems, your traces need to capture the conversation as a single, audio-aware unit rather than a series of disconnected text exchanges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Tracing](/langsmith/observability-concepts#traces) a voice agent is different from tracing a text agent. A conversation is continuous, bidirectional, and interruptible: users talk over the agent, change topics mid-sentence, and expect sub-second responses. To debug and evaluate these systems, your traces need to capture the conversation as a single, audio-aware unit rather than a series of disconnected text exchanges.
```

This page covers the core conventions for tracing voice applications in LangSmith. Follow these patterns regardless of which framework or model provider you use ([OpenAI Realtime](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime), [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live), [LiveKit](/langsmith/trace-with-livekit), or [Pipecat](/langsmith/trace-with-pipecat)).

<Note>
These conventions assume you are exporting traces to LangSmith through one of the supported [tracing setups](/langsmith/observability). For audio rendering and playback in the UI, see [Log multimodal traces](/langsmith/log-multimodal-traces) and [Upload files with traces](/langsmith/upload-files-with-traces).
</Note>

## Two architectures, two trace shapes

> How you build a voice agent determines what the trace looks like. There are two common architectures, and they produce fundamentally different traces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How you build a voice agent determines what the structure of the trace. There are two common architectures, and they produce fundamentally different traces.
```

### Cascade

A cascade chains together separate, single-purpose models: speech-to-text (STT) transcribes the user's audio, a language model (LLM) reasons over the text and decides what to do, and text-to-speech (TTS) synthesizes the reply. Middleware, tool calls, and retrieval steps sit in between.

> Because each stage is a discrete model call with a clear input and output, a cascade traces like any other agent pipeline. The trace is a tree of `STT`, `LLM`, `TTS`, tool, and middleware runs, with the pattern repeating as the conversation continues. These runs have meaningful input/output pairs (audio in → transcript out, prompt in → completion out).

Author: ```suggestion
Because each stage is a discrete model call with a clear input and output, a cascade voice agent implementation traces similarly to other agent pipelines. The trace is a tree of `STT`, `LLM`, `TTS`, tool, and middleware runs that run in parallel and cycles for each turn. These runs have meaningful input/output pairs (audio in → transcript out, prompt in → completion out).
```

not great so make a bit better but basically:
- they can run in parallel
- theres a new STT-LLM-TTS loop for each 'turn'

> 

Author: similar to the end sentence of S2S, add something about the two most common frameworks are livekit and piepcat, and link to the docs

### Speech-to-speech (S2S)

> A speech-to-speech model (such as the [OpenAI Realtime API](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime) or [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live)) processes audio natively and replies with audio over a single persistent connection — typically a WebSocket. There is no STT/LLM/TTS decomposition to trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A speech-to-speech model (such as the [OpenAI Realtime API](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime) or [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live)) processes audio natively and replies with audio over a single persistent connection, typically a WebSocket. There is no STT/LLM/TTS decomposition to trace.
```

> Instead, the model server and your client exchange a stream of **events** over the wire: audio chunks, transcription fragments, tool-call requests, turn boundaries, interruptions, and errors. The natural unit to trace is the **event payload**, not a request/response pair. Each event you record becomes one span whose content is the payload that crossed the wire. Many events carry data flowing in only one direction, so they don't have a paired input *and* output the way an LLM call does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, the model server and your client exchange a stream of **events** over the wire: audio chunks, transcription fragments, tool-call requests, turn boundaries, interruptions, and errors. The natural unit to trace is the **event payload**, not a request/response pair. Each event you record becomes one span whose content is the payload that crossed the wire. Many events carry data flowing in only one direction, so they don't have a paired input **and** output the way an LLM call does.
```

> Instead, the model server and your client exchange a stream of **events** over the wire: audio chunks, transcription fragments, tool-call requests, turn boundaries, interruptions, and errors. The natural unit to trace is the **event payload**, not a request/response pair. Each event you record becomes one span whose content is the payload that crossed the wire. Many events carry data flowing in only one direction, so they don't have a paired input *and* output the way an LLM call does.

Author: ```suggestion
Instead, the model server and your client exchange a stream of **events** over the wire: audio chunks, transcription fragments, tool-call requests, turn boundaries, interruptions, and errors. The natural unit to trace is the **event payload**, not a request/response pair. Each event you record becomes one span whose content is the payload that crossed the wire. 
```

> The rest of this page describes conventions that apply to both architectures. The provider guides cover the event-stream specifics for [OpenAI Realtime](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime) and [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live).

Reviewer: Where you mention OpenAI + Gemini here, does this only apply to them and not Pipecat and Voicekit?

Author: yep. in S2S they are the two main guys

## Core conventions

There are three conventions that make voice traces useful in LangSmith:

1. [**Trace each conversation as a single trace**](#trace-each-conversation-as-a-single-trace) instead of splitting it into multiple traces.
2. [**Record a single combined audio file**](#record-a-single-combined-audio-file) and attach it to the root run.

> 3. [**Mark the trace as audio**](#mark-the-trace-as-audio) with `ls_modality` so it renders and filters as a voice trace.

Reviewer: Should we document `ls_modailty` on this page: https://docs.langchain.com/langsmith/ls-metadata-parameters. If so, can be a follow-up just checking?

### Trace each conversation as a single trace

A conversation is a single interaction, so it should be a single trace, with the individual model calls or events nested underneath one root run that represents the whole conversation.

> Don't split a conversation into multiple traces. If you start a new trace for each exchange, you lose the information that lives *between* exchanges:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't split a conversation into multiple traces. If you start a new trace for each exchange, you lose the information that lives **between** exchanges:
```

- **Interruptions** — when the user talks over the agent and the agent stops (barge-in).
- **Timing and latency** — gaps between speakers, and how long the agent took to respond.
- **Context** — references back to earlier parts of the conversation.

> - **Conversation-level outcomes** — whether the user's goal was ultimately resolved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Interruptions**: when the user talks over the agent and the agent stops (barge-in).
- **Timing and latency**: gaps between speakers, and how long the agent took to respond.
- **Context**: references back to earlier parts of the conversation.
- **Conversation-level outcomes**: whether the user's goal was ultimately resolved.
```

> What hangs under the root run depends on your [architecture](#two-architectures-two-trace-shapes). For a cascade, the children are the model calls and middleware:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What hangs under the root run depends on your [architecture](#two-architectures-two-trace-shapes). For a [cascade](#cascade), the children are the model calls and middleware:
```

```text
realtime_session                  ← root run (whole conversation; combined audio; ls_modality="audio")
│
├─ stt                            ← a transcription call
├─ llm                            ← a model call (may include middleware and tool runs)
├─ tts                            ← a synthesis call
└─ ...                            ← the pattern repeats as the conversation continues
```

> For a speech-to-speech agent, the children are the **events** that crossed the socket:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a [speech-to-speech](#speech-to-speech-s2s) agent, the children are the **events** that crossed the socket:
```

```text
realtime_session                  ← root run (whole conversation; combined audio; ls_modality="audio")
│
├─ input_transcription            ← a fragment of the user's speech transcript
├─ output_transcription           ← a fragment of the agent's speech transcript
├─ function_call: get_weather     ← the model requested a tool
├─ function_response: get_weather ← the tool result heading back to the model
├─ turn_complete                  ← a turn boundary reported by the server
└─ interrupted                    ← the server detected user barge-in
```

<Note>

> A voice agent has no reliable notion of a "turn" — speakers overlap, interrupt, and trail off. Don't group runs into synthetic turns. Trace the real units instead: the model calls in a cascade, or the event payloads in a speech-to-speech stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A voice agent has no reliable notion of a "turn". Speakers overlap, interrupt, and trail off. Don't group runs into synthetic turns. Trace the real units instead: the model calls in a cascade, or the event payloads in a speech-to-speech stream.
```

</Note>

For background on grouping related runs, see [Nest traces](/langsmith/nest-traces). To group several separate sessions for one user, use [Threads](/langsmith/threads).

### Record a single combined audio file

> Attach **one** audio file to the root run that contains **both** the user and the agent, recorded from **what was actually played to the client** — not the audio the model generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attach **one** audio file to the root run that contains **both** the user and the agent, recorded from **what was actually played to the client**, not the audio the model generated.
```

> Record at the client. A common approach is a stereo WAV with the user's microphone on one channel and the agent's speech, captured at the speaker, on the other. This matters because the generated audio and the heard audio are not the same thing: network delay, dropped or reordered packets, and barge-in all change what the user actually experiences. A barge-in that cuts the agent off mid-sentence should appear truncated in the recording, because that's what happened. Recording what was played — rather than what was generated but possibly never heard — is what makes the trace faithful to the real interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Record at the client. A common approach is a stereo WAV with the user's microphone on one channel and the agent's speech, captured at the speaker, on the other. This matters because the generated audio and the heard audio are not the same thing: network delay, dropped or reordered packets, and barge-in all change what the user actually experiences. A barge-in that cuts the agent off mid-sentence should appear truncated in the recording, because that's what happened. Recording what was played, rather than what was generated but possibly never heard, is what makes the trace faithful to the real interaction.
```

Attach the file using the [attachments API](/langsmith/upload-files-with-traces):

```python Python
from langsmith import traceable
from langsmith.schemas import Attachment

@traceable(name="realtime_session", metadata={"ls_modality": "audio"})
def run_conversation(session_id: str, conversation_audio: bytes):
    # conversation_audio: a single recording of what was played to the client
    # (e.g. stereo WAV — user mic on L, agent speech at the speaker on R)
    ...
    return {"conversation": Attachment(mime_type="audio/wav", data=conversation_audio)}
```

<Tip>

> Audio files can be large. For high-volume production workloads, consider downsampling, using a compressed format (such as MP3 or Opus), or sampling which conversations you record in full. See [redaction and privacy](#redaction-and-privacy) for handling sensitive audio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Audio files can be large. For high-volume production workloads, consider downsampling, using a compressed format (such as MP3 or Opus), or sampling which conversations you record in full. For handling sensitive audio, refer to [redaction and privacy](#redaction-and-privacy).
```

</Tip>

### Mark the trace as audio

Set the `ls_modality` metadata field to `"audio"` on the root run. This flags the trace as a voice trace so LangSmith can render it appropriately and so you can [filter](/langsmith/filter-traces-in-application) for voice traces in your project.

```python Python
from langsmith import traceable

@traceable(
    name="realtime_session",
    metadata={"ls_modality": "audio"},
)
def run_conversation(session_id: str):
    ...
```

<Note>

> Set `ls_modality` on the **root run** so the entire conversation is identified as a voice interaction. See [Metadata parameters reference](/langsmith/ls-metadata-parameters) for other `ls_` metadata fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other `ls_` metadata fields, refer to [Metadata parameters reference](/langsmith/ls-metadata-parameters).
```
I deleted the first sentence because it felt duplicative of the paragraph before the code block. (But you can leave it in, if you have a preference!

</Note>

## Recommended metadata

Beyond `ls_modality`, attach metadata that helps you filter and segment voice traces during debugging and evaluation:

| Field | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `ls_modality` | Set to `"audio"` to mark the trace as voice. |
| `session_id` / `thread_id` | Group related sessions for one user. |
| `model` | The speech-to-speech model, or the STT/LLM/TTS models in a cascade. |
| Voice / language | The voice and detected language. |
| `event_count` / `duration_s` | Roll-up metadata describing the conversation. |
| Latency | Time-to-first-token and end-to-end response latency. |

## Redaction and privacy

Conversation audio frequently contains personally identifiable information (PII). Before recording audio in production:

- Review [Mask inputs and outputs](/langsmith/mask-inputs-outputs) to redact sensitive fields.

> - Scrub binary payloads from recorded events — replace raw audio `bytes` with a placeholder and truncate long strings — so spans stay small and readable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Scrub binary payloads from recorded events. Replace raw audio `bytes` with a placeholder and truncate long strings so spans stay small and readable.
```

---
title: Voice tracing fundamentals
sidebarTitle: Voice fundamentals
description: Best practices for tracing voice and audio agents in LangSmith, including conversation audio, single-trace conversations, and the audio modality flag.
---

Voice agents differ from text agents in ways that change how you should trace them. A conversation is continuous, bidirectional, and interruptible: users talk over the agent, change topics mid-sentence, and expect sub-second responses. To debug and evaluate these systems, your traces need to capture the conversation as a single, audio-aware unit rather than a series of disconnected text exchanges.

> This page covers the core conventions for tracing voice applications in LangSmith. Follow these patterns regardless of which framework or model provider you use ([OpenAI Realtime](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime), [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live), [LiveKit](/langsmith/trace-with-livekit), or [Pipecat](/langsmith/trace-with-pipecat)).

Author: ```suggestion
This page covers the core conventions for tracing voice applications in LangSmith. Follow these patterns regardless of which framework or model provider you use ([OpenAI Realtime](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime), [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live), [LiveKit](/langsmith/trace-with-livekit), [Pipecat](/langsmith/trace-with-pipecat)), or your own.
```

### Speech-to-speech (S2S)

A speech-to-speech model (such as the [OpenAI Realtime API](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime) or [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live)) processes audio natively and replies with audio over a single persistent connection — typically a WebSocket. There is no STT/LLM/TTS decomposition to trace.

Instead, the model server and your client exchange a stream of **events** over the wire: audio chunks, transcription fragments, tool-call requests, turn boundaries, interruptions, and errors. The natural unit to trace is the **event payload**, not a request/response pair. Each event you record becomes one span whose content is the payload that crossed the wire. Many events carry data flowing in only one direction, so they don't have a paired input *and* output the way an LLM call does.

The rest of this page describes conventions that apply to both architectures. The provider guides cover the event-stream specifics for [OpenAI Realtime](/langsmith/trace-openai-realtime) and [Gemini Live](/langsmith/trace-gemini-live).

## Core conventions

> These are the practices we recommend for getting the most out of voice traces in LangSmith. They aren't requirements — you're free to structure your traces however suits your application — but following them keeps voice traces consistent and easy to debug and evaluate.

Author: ```suggestion
These are the practices we recommend for getting the most out of voice traces in LangSmith. You should trace your voice applications however best suits your infrastructure and implementations, but following the structure we suggest here will help to make your traces consistent and easy to debug and evaluate. 
```

> We recommend three conventions:

Author: ```suggestion
We recommend three high-level conventions:
```

</Note>

For background on grouping related runs, see [Nest traces](/langsmith/nest-traces). To group several separate sessions for one user, use [Threads](/langsmith/threads).

### Record a single combined audio file

Attach **one** audio file to the root run that contains **both** the user and the agent, recorded from **what was actually played to the client** — not the audio the model generated.

Record at the client. A common approach is a stereo WAV with the user's microphone on one channel and the agent's speech, captured at the speaker, on the other. This matters because the generated audio and the heard audio are not the same thing: network delay, dropped or reordered packets, and barge-in all change what the user actually experiences. A barge-in that cuts the agent off mid-sentence should appear truncated in the recording, because that's what happened. Recording what was played — rather than what was generated but possibly never heard — is what makes the trace faithful to the real interaction.

Attach the file using the [attachments API](/langsmith/upload-files-with-traces):

```python Python
from langsmith import traceable
from langsmith.schemas import Attachment

> @traceable(name="realtime_session", metadata={"ls_modality": "audio"})

Author: ```suggestion
@traceable(name="conversation", metadata={"ls_modality": "audio"})
```

def run_conversation(session_id: str, conversation_audio: bytes):
    # conversation_audio: a single recording of what was played to the client
    # (e.g. stereo WAV — user mic on L, agent speech at the speaker on R)
    ...
    return {"conversation": Attachment(mime_type="audio/wav", data=conversation_audio)}
```

<Tip>
Audio files can be large. For high-volume production workloads, consider downsampling, using a compressed format (such as MP3 or Opus), or sampling which conversations you record in full. See [redaction and privacy](#redaction-and-privacy) for handling sensitive audio.
</Tip>

### Mark the trace as audio

Set the `ls_modality` metadata field to `"audio"` on the root run. This flags the trace as a voice trace so LangSmith can render it appropriately and so you can [filter](/langsmith/filter-traces-in-application) for voice traces in your project.

```python Python
from langsmith import traceable

@traceable(

>     name="realtime_session",

Author: ```suggestion
    name="conversation",
```

    metadata={"ls_modality": "audio"},
)
def run_conversation(session_id: str):
    ...
```

<Note>
Set `ls_modality` on the **root run** so the entire conversation is identified as a voice interaction. See [Metadata parameters reference](/langsmith/ls-metadata-parameters) for other `ls_` metadata fields.
</Note>

## Recommended metadata

Beyond `ls_modality`, attach metadata that helps you filter and segment voice traces during debugging and evaluation:

| Field | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `ls_modality` | Set to `"audio"` to mark the trace as voice. |
| `session_id` / `thread_id` | Group related sessions for one user. |
| `model` | The speech-to-speech model, or the STT/LLM/TTS models in a cascade. |
| Voice / language | The voice and detected language. |
| `event_count` / `duration_s` | Roll-up metadata describing the conversation. |

> | Latency | Time-to-first-token and end-to-end response latency. |

Author: not special to voice agents, remove

## Redaction and privacy

Conversation audio frequently contains personally identifiable information (PII). Before recording audio in production:

- Review [Mask inputs and outputs](/langsmith/mask-inputs-outputs) to redact sensitive fields.
- Scrub binary payloads from recorded events — replace raw audio `bytes` with a placeholder and truncate long strings — so spans stay small and readable.
- Consider redacting or omitting the conversation audio in regulated environments.

> - Sample which conversations you store in full to reduce data volume and exposure.

Author: remove
